## Below articles from Arduino home page (https://docs.arduino.cc/learn/starting-guide/getting-started-arduino)

### Program Structure

The absolute minimum requirement of an Arduino program is the use of two functions: void setup() and void loop(). The "void" indicates that nothing is returned on execution.

```void setup()``` - this function executes only once, when the Arduino is powered on. Here we define things such as the mode of a pin (input or output), the baud rate of serial communication or the initialization of a library.
```void loop()``` - this is where we write the code that we want to execute over and over again, such as turning on/off a lamp based on an input, or to conduct a sensor reading every X second.
The above functions are always required in an Arduino sketch, but you are of course able to add several more functions, which is useful for longer programs.

### "Sketch"

In the Arduino project, a program is referred to as a "sketch". A sketch is a file that you write your program inside. It has the .ino extension, and is always stored in a folder of the same name.
The folder can include other files, such as a header file, that can be included in your sketch.

### Libraries

Arduino libraries are an extension of the standard Arduino API, and consists of thousands of libraries, both official and contributed by the community.

Libraries simplifies the use of otherwise complex code, such as reading a specific sensor, controlling a motor or connecting to the Internet. Instead of having to write all of this code yourself, you can just install a library, include it at the top of your code, and use any of the available functionalities of it. All Arduino libraries are open source and free to use by anyone.

### A Typical Workflow
To upload code to an Arduino board using the IDE, one typically does the following:

1. Install your board - this means installing the right "package" for your board. Without the package, you can simply not use your board. Installing is done directly in the IDE, and is a quick and easy operation.

2. Create a new sketch - a sketch is your main program file. Here we write a set of instructions we want to execute on the microcontroller.

3. Compile your sketch - the code we write is not exactly how it looks like when uploaded to our Arduino: compiling code means that we check it for errors, and convert it into a binary file (1s and 0s). If something fails, you will get this in the error console.

4. Upload your sketch - once the compilation is successful, the code can be uploaded to your board. In this step, we connect the board to the computer physically, and select the right serial port.

5. Serial Monitor (optional) - for most Arduino projects, it is important to know what's going on on your board. The Serial Monitor tool available in all IDEs allow for data to be sent from your board to your computer.

Quick Reference
In this section, you will find a list of some of the most common elements in the standard Arduino API. This will help you get familiar with some key building blocks.

To explore the whole Arduino API, please refer to the Arduino Language Reference, an in-depth wiki maintained by Arduino and its community. You will find hundreds of entries, accompanied by code examples and elaborate descriptions.

General
setup()
The setup() function is where you make program configurations.

COPY
void setup() {
    //program configurations here
}
loop()
The loop() function is where your main program is stored. It will run as long as your board is powered.

COPY
void loop() {
    //main program here
}
delay()
The delay() function pauses the program for a set number of milliseconds.

The classic blink sequence is found in the snippet below:

COPY
void loop() {

   digitalWrite(LED, HIGH); //turn on an LED
   delay(1000); //as program is paused, with the LED on
   digitalWrite(LED, LOW); //program is unpaused, and the LED is turned off
   delay(1000); //program is paused, with the LED off

}
The delay() function is an incredibly useful function, and you will find it in almost all examples. But, for efficiency of the code, it is not the best option, as it prevents the Arduino from doing anything for the duration of the delay.

For this, we can use the millis() function.

millis()
The millis() function is a bit more advanced, but an incredibly resourceful function. It allows you to have multiple events happening simultaneously, without pausing the program. This is done by measuring time (in milliseconds) passed since the program started.

Then, with the use of intervals and continuously storing the time for last event, a simple algorithm can be made to have events happening at specific times without pausing the program.

See the example below:

COPY
unsigned long previousMillis_1 = 0; //store time for first event
unsigned long previousMillis_2 = 0; //store time for second event

const long interval_1 = 1000; //interval for first event
const long interval_2 = 2000; //interval for second event


void setup(){

}

void loop() {

//check time since program started, and store in "currentMillis"
unsigned long currentMillis = millis();

   //conditional that checks whether 1 second has passed since last event
   if (currentMillis - previousMillis_1 >= interval_1) {
        previousMillis_1 = millis();
       //execute a piece of code, every *1 second*
   }

   //conditional that checks whether 2 seconds have passed since last event
   if (currentMillis - previousMillis_2 >= interval_2) {
        previousMillis_2 = millis();
    //execute a piece of code, every *2 seconds*
   }

}
While the millis() function is a more advanced concept than the delay() function, it is a good to start practicing it early on.

Functions
Learn more about Arduino functions.

You can create custom functions that either just executes code and returns to the program, or that returns a result.

Example of a void function that does not return:

COPY
int x;

void loop(){
    thisFunction(); //execute the function
}

void thisFunction() {
    x++; //increase x by 1 each time function is run.
}
Example of a type int function that returns a value.

COPY
int value;

void setup(){

}

void loop(){
    value = returnFunction();
}

int returnFunction() {
    int returnValue = 5 + 2;
    return returnValue;
}
Variable Definition
Variables can either be created locally or globally. Variables that are defined in the loop() are considered local, and variables defined at the top of your sketch are considered global.

COPY
int sensorReading = x; //global variable

void setup(){

}

void loop(){
    int sensorReading = x; //local variable
}
Data Types
See all data types in the Language Reference.

There are several data types available for use, and below are some of the most common:

COPY
bool 
byte
char
double
float
int
long
short
String
To store data in for example an int (integer):

COPY
int exampleNumber = 25;
For numbers with a lot of decimals, we can use float:

COPY
float exampleNumber = 22.2123002;
Or to store a string, we can use the String function:

COPY
String exampleSentence = "This is a string!";
For simple switches and true/false, we use booleans:

COPY
bool exampleSwitch = true; // true/false
Serial Communication
Read more about the Serial class.

Serial communication is essential to Arduino programming, as it is the easiest way to know what goes on on your board.

For this, we can use the Serial class.

Serial.begin()
Initializes serial communication between board & computer. This is defined in the void setup() function, where you also specify baud rate (speed of communication).

COPY
void setup() {
    Serial.begin(9600);
}
Serial.print()
Prints data to the serial port, which can be viewed in the Arduino IDE Serial Monitor tool.

COPY
void loop() {
    Serial.print();
}
Serial.read()
Reads the incoming serial data.

COPY
void loop() {
    int incomingByte = Serial.read();
}
GPIO / Pin Management
Configuring, controlling and reading the state of a digital/analog pin on an Arduino.

pinMode()
Configures a digital pin to behave as an input or output. Is configured inside the void setup() function.

COPY
pinMode(pin, INPUT); //configures pin as an input
pinMode(pin, OUTPUT); //configures pin as an output
pinMode(pin, INPUT_PULLUP); //enables the internal pull-up resistor
You can read more about digital pins in the article about Digital Pins.

digitalRead()
Reads the state of a digital pin. Used to for example detect a button click.

COPY
int state = digitalRead(pin); //store the state in the "state" variable
digitalWrite()
Writes a high or low state to a digital pin. Used to switch on or off a component.

COPY
digitalWrite(pin, HIGH); // writes a high (1) state to a pin (aka turn it on)
digitalWrite(pin, LOW); // writes a low (0) state to a pin (aka turn it off)
analogRead()
Reads the voltage of an analog pin, and returns a value between 0-1023 (10-bit resolution). Used to read analog components.

COPY
sensorValue = analogRead(A1); //stores reading of A1 in "sensorValue" variable
analogWrite()
Writes a value between 0-255 (8-bit resolution). Used for dimming lights or setting the speed of a motor. Also referred to as PWM, or Pulse Width Modulation.

COPY
analogWrite(pin, value); //write a range between 0-255 to a specific pin
PWM is only available on specific pins (marked with a "~" symbol).

Structure
The structure of the Arduino API is based on C++, and can be considered the building blocks of a program.

Conditionals
Conditionals are some of the most popular used elements in any program. In Arduino, a typical conditional consists of an if and else statement.

COPY
if(variable == true){
    //do something
}
else {
    //do something else
}
You can make use of several if/else statements in your code.

Loops / Iterations
The for and while loops are commonly used in programs, to execute a block of code for a set number of times, or while a condition is met.

A basic use of a while loop to execute a block of code while variable is true.

COPY
while (variable == true) {
    //do something
}
A basic use of a for loop is to execute a block of code a custom number of times (in this case, 10).

COPY
for (int x = 0; x < 10; x++) {
      //do something 10 times
  }
To break out of a loop, you can use break. In the snippet below, if a condition is met (variable is true), we break out of the loop.

COPY
for (int x = 0; x <= 10; x++) {
      if(variable == true) {
          break;
      }
  }
Arithmetic Operators
Arithmetic operators are used for addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and other mathematical calculations.

COPY
int x = 5;
int y = 2;

x + y; //result is 7
x * y; //result is 10
x - y; //result is 3
Comparison Operators
Comparison operators are used for comparing one property to another, and are a key component of a conditional statement.

There are several comparison operators:

COPY
!= //not equal to
< //less than
<= //less than or equal to
== //equal to
> //greater than
>= //greater than or equal to
To use them in a conditional, see the following example:

COPY
if(value > 10) {
    //do something
}
Boolean Operators
Boolean operators (logical NOT !, AND && and OR ||) can for example be used for more advanced conditionals.

To use the AND && operator:

COPY
if(value > 10 && otherValue > 10){
    //do something if only if *both* conditions are met
}
To use the OR || operator:

COPY
if(value > 10 || otherValue > 10){
    //do something if a one *or* the other condition is met
}
To use the NOT ! operator:

COPY
if(!value){
    //do something if value is false (!)
}
Compound Operators
Compound operators consists of two operators, which are used to perform two operations in the same statement. This can for example be to add + and assign = a value at the same time.

Here are some examples:

COPY
x = 5;
y = 2;

x++; //increase by one, so x is now 6
x--; //decrease by one, so x is now 4

x += y; //x is now 7 (add and assign)
x -= y; //x is now 3 (subtract and assign)
x *= y; //x is now 10 (multiply and assign)
