### Program Structure

The absolute minimum requirement of an Arduino program is the use of two functions: void setup() and void loop(). The "void" indicates that nothing is returned on execution.

```void setup()``` - this function executes only once, when the Arduino is powered on. Here we define things such as the mode of a pin (input or output), the baud rate of serial communication or the initialization of a library.
```void loop()``` - this is where we write the code that we want to execute over and over again, such as turning on/off a lamp based on an input, or to conduct a sensor reading every X second.
The above functions are always required in an Arduino sketch, but you are of course able to add several more functions, which is useful for longer programs.

### "Sketch"

In the Arduino project, a program is referred to as a "sketch". A sketch is a file that you write your program inside. It has the .ino extension, and is always stored in a folder of the same name.
The folder can include other files, such as a header file, that can be included in your sketch.

### Libraries

Arduino libraries are an extension of the standard Arduino API, and consists of thousands of libraries, both official and contributed by the community.

Libraries simplifies the use of otherwise complex code, such as reading a specific sensor, controlling a motor or connecting to the Internet. Instead of having to write all of this code yourself, you can just install a library, include it at the top of your code, and use any of the available functionalities of it. All Arduino libraries are open source and free to use by anyone.

### ex. print in monitor window

```
int delayTime = 500;

void setup() {
  // put your setup code here, to run once:
  
  Serial.begin(9600);

}

void loop() {
  // put your main code here, to run repeatedly:

  Serial.println("Hello, Arduino");
  delay(delayTime);

}
```

### ex. ombine string and print

```
int delayTime = 500;
String name = "BH Lee";

void setup() {
  // put your setup code here, to run once:
  
  Serial.begin(9600);

}

void loop() {
  // put your main code here, to run repeatedly:

  Serial.print("Hello, Arduino! ");
  Serial.print("I'm ");
  Serial.print(name);
  Serial.print(".");
  Serial.println("");

  delay(delayTime);

}
```

### ex. area calculation

```
int delayTime = 500;

float pi = 3.14;
float radius = 2.;
float area;

void setup() {
  // put your setup code here, to run once:
  
  Serial.begin(9600);

}

void loop() {
  // put your main code here, to run repeatedly:

  area = sq(radius) * pi;

  Serial.print("Circle area with radis = ");
  Serial.print(radius);
  Serial.print(" is ");
  Serial.println(area);

  delay(delayTime);

}
```




